Blessed in Order to be a Blessing

Who comforts us in all our troubles, so that we can
comfort those in any trouble with the comfort we
ourselves have received from God.
2 Corinthians 1:4
In commenting on this verse, Wesley says: “He that has experienced one kind of
affliction is able to comfort others in that affliction. He that has experienced all kinds of
affliction is able to comfort them in all.” If you are currently struggling, draw strength
from the truth that God’s comfort is given in all trials. As you reflect on the tribulations
you have been through, try and remember how God comforted you, and then prayerfully
consider whether God wants to use you to bring sympathetic comfort to someone
similarly afflicted. Just as God blesses us in order that we can be a blessing to others, you
have been comforted in order to comfort others. In this way we put the storms in our
lives, the things we would rather had not happened, to good use.
A fable tells of a little piece of wood that once complained bitterly because its owner kept
whittling away at it, cutting it and filling it full of holes. But the one who was cutting it so
remorselessly paid no attention to its complaining. He was making a flute out of that
piece of ebony, and he was too wise to give up because the wood moaned so piteously.
His actions seemed to say, "Little piece of wood, without these holes and all this cutting,
you would be an ugly stick forever - just a useless piece of ebony. What I am doing now
may make you think that I am destroying you when actually I am changing you into a
flute whose sweet music will comfort sorrowing hearts. My cutting you is the making of
you, for only thus can you be a blessing to the world."
Allow God to compose sweet music from the notes of your pain, and let him lead you to
the person who needs to hear your song.
A Prayer from Susanna Wesley
I thank you O God for the relief and satisfaction of mind that come with the firm
assurance that you govern the world; for the patience and resignation to your
providence that are afforded as I reflect that even the tumultuous and irregular
actions of the sinful are, nevertheless, under your direction, who are wise, good and
omnipotent, and have promised to make all things work together for good to those
who love you.